Learning Culture Module (#56)
uwhackweek/hackweeks-as-a-service: docs/culture/psychological-safety.md

# Psychological Safety

> One of the primary reasons we host hackweeks is to help build a culture of collaboration. We do this because research is becoming increasingly interdependent, and because we know that cross-disciplinary exchanges increase the likelihood for us to address complex challenges. We also think that collaboration is fun and keeps our work more interesting and engaging!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the primary reasons we host hackweeks is to help build a culture of collaboration. We do this because research is becoming increasingly interdependent and because we know that cross-disciplinary exchanges increase the likelihood for us to address complex challenges. We also think that collaboration is fun and keeps our work more interesting and engaging!
```

In order for collaboration to occur we must be able to share information, ask questions and express our opinions openly {cite:p}`edmondson_psychological_2023`. When we ask these questions of people outside of our disciplinary boundary, we might be stepping into situations were we feel incompetent or intrusive. This is where creating a psychologically safe environment can help.

:::{admonition} Psychological Safety: Defined
:class: note
Psychological safety is a perception related to the consequences of taking *interpersonal risks* {cite:p}`edmondson_psychological_1999`. When people feel psychologically safe they can "express themselves physically, cognitively and emotionally" rather than disengage or "withdraw and defend their personal selves" {cite:p}`kahn_psychological_1990`.
:::

> In this lesson we will work on developing more insight into risk and all the ways it might show up in a short format training setting. We'll do some exercises to assess our individual sense of risk, and build our capacity to assess how others might be experiencing risk in a classroom, small group and 1x1 learning setting. Then we will share strategies for increasing psychological safety by highlighting the positive outcomes that can occur when we willingly take risks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this lesson we will work on developing more insight into risk and all the ways it might show up in a short format training setting. We'll do some exercises to assess our individual sense of risk and build our capacity to assess how others might be experiencing risk in a classroom, small group and 1x1 learning setting. Then we will share strategies for increasing psychological safety by highlighting the positive outcomes that can occur when we willingly take risks.
```

Reviewer: @scottyhq @jomey Thoughts on the practice of putting each sentence on a newline? I seem to remember this made future diffs more manageable, particularly if we're not enforcing an 80/100 character max per line. @aaarendt I'd be happy to help make that change if we decide to go that route.

Reviewer 2: > Thoughts on the practice of putting each sentence on a newline?

I have my editor set to wrap each line at 100 characters independent of a sentence. Might be worth adding a `.editorconfig` similar to the one we have for the [Jupyter Book template](https://github.com/uwhackweek/jupyterbook-template/blob/main/.editorconfig)

:::

## Hackweeks: a high risk environment?

Let's begin by thinking about the factors that influence our perception of risk at one of our events. Over the years we as organizers have often noticed participants feeling anxious and wondering if they belong at a hackweek. In some ways this is understandable! Here are some reasons why:

* Hackweeks are a relatively new modality of learning and participants are often not sure what they are signing up for. 
* Hackweeks actively promote networking with people you haven't met before, which might cause a sense of anxiety for some.
* The short duration of hackweeks may cause many participants to feel a sense of urgency to get a lot done in the time provided. People might also feel they need to make the most of the money they invested in attending the event in person.

> * Hackweeks require participants to make quick decisions about tutorials they attend and projects they join, often with limited time for deliberation.

Reviewer: Thoughts about adding a point addressing career/experience stages. E.g.: Hackweeks bring together novices and experts from across disciplines and career stages. It can be easy to for participants to notice where they are novices and harder to notice where they are experts.

* providing more information in advance of an event about course content and project ideas. 
* designing icebreakers and networking activities in ways that attend to a diversity of personality types and ways of seeing the world.
* raising more funding to provide scholarship support and mitigate financial risks.

There are also some risks that we cannot control, and might not want to eliminate. As a participant-driven learning model, some uncertainty and risk is going to be built-in to the hackweek experience. We believe the key to creating psychologically safe learning environments is to build our awareness of the *stakes* or *consequences* associated with each risk. If our assessment is that the stakes are low, then we can voluntarily step into risk without fear. 

```{admonition} Note 
:class: warning
Lowering stakes to create a sense of psychological safety is not the same "lowering standards". We are aware that there are many high risk environments where the stakes are also very high. An example would be a surgeon performing a risky procedure on a patient. That would not be a time when we want to foster a "safe-to-fail" environment!
```

## Risk, Power and Identity

> So far we have explored the risks inherent in the structure and design of a hackweek. Now we turn to they was in which individual perception and experience of risk can vary with our personal identities. To explore these ideas we will use a framework that links together the concepts of power, privilege and interesectionality {cite:p}`kellam_using_2021`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So far we have explored the risks inherent in the structure and design of a hackweek. Now we turn to the ways in which individual perception and experience of risk can vary with our personal identities. To explore these ideas we will use a framework that links together the concepts of power, privilege and interesectionality {cite:p}`kellam_using_2021`.
```

:::{admonition} Activity Instructions
:class: tip
The purpose of this activity is to locate yourself on your own wheel of power and privilege. We will not ask you to share your wheel with others. Instead, we'll invite you to discuss in small groups general ways your experience of the exercise might affect how you show up at the hackweek. 
1. Think about 3 or 4 identities that have particular meaning for you when you think about participating in a learning environment, and jot these down in a list.
1. Take the image we have provided of a circle with the word "high privilege" at the center, and "low privilege" on the outer edge.
1. Draw a line from the center of the circle to the outer edge for each of the identities you described. 
1. Choose a word that represents one realization of that identity associated with high and low privilege, and label your diagram accordingly.
1. Now, draw a star on each of your identity lines showing where you place yourself on the continuum of privilege.
1. Optionally, connect each of your stars with a line. The total area inscribed represents your overall privilege with respect to the identities you chose.

**Prompts for Discussion**

> * Typically the center of such a circle is associated with greater power, and the outer edges associated with marginalization (see example [wheel of power and privilege](https://usq.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/53/2022/05/Power.jpg)). Does this ring true for your example?

Reviewer 3: can we include this image directly on the page?

* (other prompts)
:::

## Suggested "hacks" to build awareness 

> The overall goal of this module is for us to begin building awareness of our own identities and those of others in the context of systemic patterns of power, privilege and marginalization. As our awareness grows we can begin altering our own behaviors to continue fostering psychological safety in group settings. Here are some suggested things to ask ourselves when entering any learning space:

Reviewer 3: This is great! Could consider moving the overall goal statement in the first sentence to the very top of the page
